# 1.1 Beginnings of Cryptography

Cryptography or the art of concealing meaning in writing ist over 4000 years old. 

# 1.2 Various Chiffres

# 1.3 The computational Revolution

The advent of the electronic computer changed the field of cryptography fundamentally. Starting with the "bombe", produced by Alan Turing and refined by Gordon Welchman around 1940, the world ushered into a new era of automated de- and encryption. 
The bombe is an electro-mechanical device that was key to breaking the ciphers produced by the enigma - a device used by the german military in the second world war to secure their communications. Turings bombe was the first machine that was able to break message encryption in an automated fashion. Previously cryptoanalysts had to break ciphers "by hand" i.e. by doing manual frequency analysis for example. Breaking the enemies communication provided a vital advantage for the Allies during World War Two.
The next cryptographic revolution came in 1971 when Whitfield Diffie invented public-key-cryptography, single-handedly eliminating a problem that haunted cryptographers from the beginnigs of their field of expertise: the establishing of a shared secret over insecure channels, also known as the key distribution problem. Previously the security of an encryption scheme based on the fact, that there was atleast one element in said scheme, that must remain unknown to malicious parties intending to attack and decipher the communication, for example a password. Public-key-cryptography does not work like this: Parties wishing to communicate simply exchange their public keys over an unsecured channel and are able to establish a guaranteed shared secret from that. Without knowing the corresponding private keys, the public keys are worthless in the eyes of an attacker. But the maths behind Public-key-cryptography is prohibitively expensive if one attemts to encrypt something this way by hand. Progress like this was only possible by utilising electronic computers.
When those computers later on became widely available for a broader range of people suddenly everyone was able to encrypt information with complicated schemes. And for the first time the security of those schemes was mathematically provable. In fact the prove of some of those later schemes guaranteed protection even from entities with massive resources, manpower and expertise without the need for skilled and qualified cryptographers. 
The first openly available standart for electronic encryption was a symmetric cipher called "Data Encryption Standard" or DES. Developed in the early 1970s at IBM the cipher was published in 1977 as an official Federeal Information Processing Standard (FIPS). The security of DES was disputed right from its first publication. Even in the late seventies the key length was critisized as too short, although it took until June of 1997 before the first DES message was decrypted via brute force attack. In January of the same year the search for a predecessor of DES was announced by the National Institute of Standards and Technology of the United States (NIST). This predecessor supposed to be "an unclassified, publicly disclosed encryption algorithm capable of protecting sensitive government information well into the next century." To increase trust into this standard-to-be the search was public and NIST relied on submissions from the cryptographic community. 


